COPD is a chronic obstructive lung disease
that makes it hard to move air
out of the lungs. The key problem is
incomplete exhalation.
When air cannot leave efficiently, it
becomes trapped.
Lung volume increases, the diaphragm
flattens,
and the patient must work harder to
breathe.
COPD usually includes a mix of chronic
bronchitis and emphysema.
Chronic bronchitis is mainly an airway
problem.
Inflammation and excess mucus narrow the
airways, causing chronic productive
cough, coarse breath sounds, wheezing,
secretion retention, and infection risk.
Emphysema is mainly an alveolar problem.
Alveolar walls are destroyed, elastic
recoil is lost,
and small airways collapse more easily
during exhalation.
This leads to air trapping,
hyperinflation,
diminished breath sounds, barrel chest,
and
dyspnea with activity.
Gas exchange worsens because ventilation
and perfusion are not evenly matched.
This VQ mismatch commonly causes
hypoxemia.
Carbon dioxide retention can occur in
advanced disease, acute exacerbation,
or respiratory muscle fatigue, but not
every COPD patient retains
carbon dioxide.
That is why SpO2 alone is not enough.
RTs must assess work of breathing, breath
sounds,
respiratory pattern, mental status, oxygen
requirement,
and ABG or VBG trends.
COPD is confirmed with spirometry.
A reduced post-bronchodilator FEV1 over
FVC supports obstructive airflow limitation.
Gold airflow grades use FEV1% predicted.
GOLD 1 is 80% or higher.
GOLD 2 is 50% to 79%.
GOLD 3 is 30% to 49%.
And GOLD 4 is below 30%.
For board questions, remember that GOLD
describes airflow limitation,
but the patient's current severity also
depends on symptoms, exacerbation
history, oxygenation, ventilation,
and clinical status.
During an exacerbation, watch for
increased dyspnea,
increased cough, thicker or purulent
sputum,
increased oxygen need, worsening air
movement,
fatigue, and poor response to treatment.
Red flags include new confusion or
drowsiness, rising PaCO2 with
falling pH, silent chest, inability to
speak full sentences, severe fatigue,
sudden
unilateral absent breath sounds, or no
improvement after therapy.
Management includes titrated oxygen when
hypoxemic, bronchodilators to reduce airway
resistance, corticosteroids during
exacerbations, antibiotics when
infection is suspected, and airway
clearance for selected patients with
retained secretions.
NIV, such as BiPAP, may be
needed when increased work of breathing,
elevated PaCO2,
and low pH suggest ventilatory failure.
If mental status, acidosis, or distress
worsens despite NIV, escalate urgently.
The big takeaway.
COPD causes obstruction, obstruction
causes incomplete exhalation,
incomplete exhalation causes air trapping,
and air trapping increases work
of breathing and gas exchange problems.
A strong RT asks, is this patient
oxygenating,
ventilating, moving air, clearing
secretions,
responding to therapy, and maintaining the
strength to keep breathing?